
				  Getting Started With OMEn
					   October, 1994
	 (C) 1994 Esquimalt Digital Logic Inc. All rights reserved.


						 Contents

Print Me!
Why OMEn is a Little Different
Most Confusing Items
Startup
OMEn Mouse/Display Pointers
Finding the Files
Getting out of a folder
The System Folder
Directory Window Scroll Control
The Demo Disk
Opening (running) Software
Opening Document Files
Starting Micro Word Program to Read the Document Files
Copying Files
Copying Between Floppies; Changing Floppy disks
Ordering


						Print Me!

Printing out this Getting Started file will provide the user with a
ready reference to check in as required when running OMEn for the
first time.
	Once you're "into" the system, of course, you can read Getting
Started on screen using Micro Word, but that's not much help if you
don't know how to search directories (folders), or open programs or
documents.


					A Little Different

OMEn's user interface is a little different from other systems such
as GEM or Mac. This is necessary to accommodate the true multi-
tasking nature of OMEn, the new type of file system, and to create
the more flexible and intuitive "generic drag-&-drop" interface.
These differences mean there are a few basic items to learn in order
to work with OMEn, and these are outlined below.


				  The Most Confusing Items

The items which cause the most confusion for new users (especially
GEM or Mac users) are:

a) having to drag windows from the top left corner instead of
top center area. (This allows each window to have its own
menu bar or buttons at the top of the window.)

b) single clicking instead of double clicking, and use of the
right mouse button (or left button with shift key held
down) for some functions.

c) No disk drive icons. Click on "DIRs" to open a directory
window. Click on "Disk Drives" in that window to access
the available drives, viewed as directory folders.

d) Opening documents. To open a document, simply drag it into
the application's window from a directory window, the same
way you would copy the file by dragging it to another
directory window, or delete it by dragging it to the
trash. (Directory windows copy files, the trash deletes
them; applications open them.) There are no file selection
boxes with most OMEn software.

e) Files in Memory.
		With most systems, when an application opens a file,
the data from the file becomes the private property of the
application until it is written back to disk.
		With OMEn, all memory becomes a "virtual RAMDisk" as
required. Data being edited is in the form of a file-in-
memory. The file, and its data, in memory may be accessed
from its usual directory, by any application.
		Files can be copied from a disk into the Memory
directory and vise-versa, by dragging between two
directory windows. They can be opened to two or more
applications at once for viewing or editing, by dragging
them from their directory into the desired applications.


						  Startup

On the PC with Gemulator, it is necessary to start up the Gemulator
68000 (Atari) emulator, then follow the same steps as with the Atari
version.

On the Atari, OMEn is started by quickly double clicking on the
OMEN259D.PRG (on PC: OMGL259D.PRG) icon or name in a GEM directory
window.

					*	*	*	*	*

At bootup, the system searches by name for Fonts and Settings folders
in the following order:
Drive C/OMEN/Fonts(Settings)
Drive C/Fonts(Settings)
Drive A/OMEN/Fonts(Settings)
Drive A/Fonts(Settings)

The boot drive should not have a label, because the label will
replace the name "Drive C" or "Drive A" and the system won't be able
to find the directories.

Application software will look in "Fonts" to find scaleable text
fonts and "Settings" to find system and program preferences.
	Unlicenced demo versions of OMEn ignore the prefs & settings in
the "Settings" folder, but licenced versions can install a desired
printer manager, individual sound files (for beep, alert, red-alert,
ta-dah, and wait) and background picture, and automatically start up
your most-used software. Desired video mode and communications
settings are reinstated immediately.
	Because multiple programs can be started up quickly and don't
tie up the system, automatically starting up software in OMEn is more
useful than with other systems.


				  OMEn Mouse/Display Pointers

* "Click" means just one click: there is no double clicking with
OMEn.

* Atari and PC based OMEn use a virtual display which is twice as
tall as the actual screen, except in Atari TT Hirez where the
screen is already two full pages. In order to scroll down to
see the bottom half of the display, simply move the mouse to
the bottom of the screen and keep going - the display will
scroll. To scroll back to the top, just move to the top and
keep going in the same manner as going down.


					 Finding the Files:

	The file management system is not complicated, but it does need
a bit of introduction.
There are no disk drive icons. Instead, a directory window for
viewing files is opened by clicking on "DIRs" at the top of the
display.
	Files are shown with their name followed either by a picture
("icon") (for types of files the system knows) or a four character
file extension. Here are the current uses of icons:

   Folder Directory  "Folder" Icon
   Binder Directory  Custom Icon inside binder, or "Binder" Icon
				 (Icons can be created using "Paint Booth")
   Text File     	 Piece of Paper
   Program		 Running animal (you can "run" the program)
   I/O Protocol	 Diamond
   I/O Port		 Double Arrow
   I/O Channel mgr.	 Diamond with double arrow inside
   Sound			 Speaker
   Font Bitmap		 Letter "A" icon

The directory window first opens showing the "Memory" root directory.
In the memory directory are two subdirectories: "Disk Drives" and
"System" which give access to DOS/GEM disk drives and to system files
loaded into memory at startup, respectively.

So, to start:

* Click on DIRs at the top of the main window. This opens
a directory window. The window starts up looking at the
Memory folder, which is the root directory for the whole
system, including the disk drives.

* Click (once) on Disk Drives. This folder contains all
the GEM/DOS drives and disks in the system. The
available drives are shown as folders in the directory
window. Drives don't have icons on the desktop.

* Click on the drive containing the OMEn software. It
opens to show the files and folders on the drive.
Programs that you can run are shown with a "running
animal" icon.

* Click on a program to start it up.


					Getting out of a folder.

	To exit a folder to its parent folder, simply click on the name
of the current folder, which is just above the list of files (on the
second line of the directory window). On a colour screen, this name
is on a blue background.
	To exit out from several levels of folders at once, click on the
name at the very top of the directory window. If you are anywhere on
a drive, this will exit to the Disk Drives folder showing the list of
drives. If you are already in that folder, it will exit to the Memory
folder.
	Since the Memory folder is the root folder, there is no way to
exit outwards from it and clicking on this name will have no effect.

	The other folder shown in the Memory directory when you boot-up
OMEn (besides Disk Drives) is System. It contains software which is
always placed there when OMEn starts up. Below is a more detailed
example of entering and exiting folders, with the System Folder.


					  The System Folder

To view the OMEn system files, first open a directory window (see 
above). Click on "System". The display in the window will change to
show the files inside the "System" directory, and the word "System"
will replace "Memory" on the second line of the window.

OMEn's Input/Output manager files (except additional printer drivers)
are in "System", and there are also some application programs there.
Files in "System" are already loaded when OMEn is started, so they
will start without accessing the disk drive.

Clicking on a program will start it running - see "Opening Software",
below.

To leave the "System" directory, click on the word "System" up near
the top of the directory window. This will exit from the current
directory (System) and go out to the previous directory (Memory).


			    Directory Window Scroll Control

When there are more files in a directory than will fit in the
directory window, the Scroll Bar along the left side of the window
becomes active.
	To go up or down by a window-full of files at a time, click on
the up or down arrow keys.
	To go up or down by just one file, click on the up or down carat
symbols.
	To jump immediately to any area of the window, click on the
desired position in the vertical scroll bar.
	To do "live scrolling", hold the mouse button down in the scroll
bar area and move the mouse slowly up and down the scroll bar.


					   The Demo Disk

The demo disk contains many files. Each type of file is placed in an
appropriate folder on the disk.

To view files on the demo disk click on Disk Drives (in the "Memory"
directory). The display will change to show all the DOS or GEM drives
on your system.
	Click on Drive A (without moving the mouse). The list of the
files in the main ("root") directory of the disk will be shown. At
this point the name "Disk Drives" will be at the very top of the
directory window, and "Drive A" will be underneath it.
	Of course, a directory can be opened for any drive on the system
(floppy disk B and hard drives) by clicking on that drive.

To find the application programs on the disk, click on the "Software"
directory. To find the documentation, click on "OMEn User Docs"
(shortened to "OMEN USE" if DOS or GEM copied it) and so on. There
are additional directories for Fonts, Pictures and Sounds. The
"Settings" directory contains a text file describing settings.


				  Opening (Running) Software

To open (run) an application program, you must locate it (above) and
then click (without moving the mouse) on its name in the directory.
The program will load and its window will open without affecting the
rest of the display.
	Don't make the mistake of trying to run a program by clicking on
its instructions in "E_Util Progs" ("or E_UTILPR") documentation
directory instead of the program itself, which is in the "Software"
directory.


				   Opening Document Files

Once an application program is running, it can open (view and edit)
documents of its proper type.
	It is necessary to exit the "Software" or "System" directory
where the program was found, and go the directory where the document
file is to be found (See Viewing Demo Disk Files, above). Or, the
"Software" directory can be left open and the document directory
viewed in a second directory window, opened by clicking again on
DIRs.
	When the document to be opened is located, press down the mouse
button on the file and, with the button still pressed down, move the
mouse into the window of the program that is to open the file. Then
let go of the mouse button, and the file will be opened by the
program. (With Micro Word and text files, it is easiest to drag the
file to Micro Word's "File" button.)

"Opening" a file can mean different things to different programs.
Sound Player will play digitized sound files, while Font Demo will
make a bitmapped font for display or printout from an outline font
definition file.

Here is a list of document file types for the demo programs. The
programs not shown do not open document files of any type.

   PROGRAM      OPENS              FILE EXTENSION   ICON

   Micro Word   OMEn Text files    TEXT             Piece of paper
   Paint Booth  Bitmapped pictures BM,BMAP,BM01,... None
   Sound Player Digitized Sounds   SOUN             Speaker
   Font Demo    Outline Fonts      PS3F,OM3F,PS     None
   File Info    Any file
   Binary Ed    Any file (This utility is for programmers)
   Cheap OMEN TO ASCII
   - Same as Micro Word (changes it to "TXT" for GEM)
   Stereo Sound Rate Reducer
         Stereo Digitized Sounds   SOUN             Speaker

By opening Micro Word, you can view (and print, and edit) the
instructions for all the individual progams supplied.


	   Starting Micro Word Program to Read the Document Files

* Locate Micro Word in the Software folder on the disk.
* Click on it to start it running.
* Locate the document to be opened in its own folder.
* Drag the document from the directory window to the File
button in the Micro Word window. Micro Word will read
it off the disk and open it.

	Note: The Micro Word you see in the Software folder is a binder
called "Micro Word". It contains the Micro Word program, the Micro 
Word users' manual (plus any pictures used in that manual), and three
different sizes of Micro Word custom icons for different screen
resolutions.
	A binder is a disk directory, similar to a folder except that it
doesn't open from the GUI to show the files. Instead, it works as if
the entire binder with all its files was one file:
	a) If it is clicked on, the Micro Word program starts up.
	b) If the binder is dragged into a running copy of the
Micro Word program (or other word processor), the Micro Word users'
manual is opened.
	c) Directory windows look inside the binder for the appropriate
icon and (if available) uses that instead of displaying a built-in
system icon.
	d) Any resource files required by the application or the
document in the binder are hidden from the user and safe from
accidental deletion, but available to software.
	e) Of course, if the binder is copied, it is copied with all its
"resources" (files) complete and intact.

To open up a binder, rename it so that its name is different than the
name of the program inside (by dragging it to "Rename" at the top of
the display or to a running copy of the "File Info" program). Or
change its FileType (extension) from ".BIND" to ".FOLD". Then it can
be opened as a normal folder to access the files inside, by clicking
on it.


					    Copying Files

	Files in the Memory folder are not saved on a disk; they will
disappear when you exit from OMEn or turn off the computer. This
applies as well to any new files copied into the System folder, which
is also in memory.

  To copy a file:

* Two directory windows are required. If only one is
open, click again on DIRs to open a second one.
* Get to the folder where you want to copy the file to in
the second directory window. (You have to be viewing
inside that folder, seeing its files.)
* Drag the file from the first directory window to the
second one. It will be copied.


	Copying Between Floppies; Changing Floppy disks

  To copy files between disks with just one floppy drive:

* Drag the file(s) into the Memory folder from the first
disk, creating a copy of the files in memory.
* Swap disks. After you swap floppies, exit from Drive A
in the directory window back to Disk Drives.
(proceedure described above) and then re-enter Drive A
to open (read-in) the new disk.
* Drag the files from Memory into the new disk directory
to copy them to it.
* Delete the files from Memory (if desired).

	To select several files, click on each one with the RIGHT mouse
button. To select all the files, click "select all" from the "Dir
Misc" menu near the top right of the directory window.
	If a disk has a "volume label" (a name), this name will be shown
instead of "Drive A" once the disk has been opened.

	OMEn handles any MS-DOS or Atari disk format properly, including
5-1/4" disks. However, many PC BIOSes will not read disks except for
360K, 720K and 1440K sizes. Atari disks formatted for extra space to
800K, 900K, 1600K and so on will not work on these PCs (nor on
Macintoshes).
	If you are using a 5-1/4" external drive on an Atari, you should
run Atari Disk Drives I/O port in the System folder (click on it like
a program) and set the "Floppy Seek Speed" to 6 or 12 milli-seconds
instead of 3 milliseconds, which is too fast for most 5-1/4" drives.


					Copying the Demo Disk

If the demo disk is copied from DOS or GEM, the file names are
shortened to eight upper case characters and the file extensions are
shortened to three characters.
	The best way to copy the entire demo from GEM is to format
another 720K disk and do a complete disk copy by dragging the drive A
icon onto the drive B icon. From DOS, the "Backup" command is
available. Many disk copy programs such as "Copy II" can also be used
to copy all the sectors of the disk.

From OMEn, without a hard drive, one floppy, and more than one
megabyte of memory, drag the "Drive A" directory file into the
"Memory" folder.
	Place the copy disk in the drive. Enter the original Drive A
folder in "Disk Drives" to access the new disk. Open the copy "Drive 
A" in "Memory", then click on "Select All" from the "Dir Misc" menu.
	Drag the selected files to the directory of the new disk.

Unfortunately, the current version of OMEn is quite slow with floppy
disks due to an interaction between the ST BIOS and the multi-
tasking. Friendly boxes showing the number of files and folders
remaining haven't been put in yet, either.

With one megabyte or less of memory and a single floppy disk, the
entire disk can't be copied at once as there isn't enough memory.
	The files must be copied into "Memory" in groups, transferred to
the new disk, and then erased from memory to free up space. Drive A
must be closed and re-opened each time the disk is swapped. (It's
easier to do the "Disk Copy" from GEM.)

With two floppy drives, coping the demo to a disk in Drive B is
easier. Enter the Drive A folder, viewing the original disk. Open a
second directory window and enter the Drive B folder, viewing the
blank disk. In Drive A, choose "Select All" from the "File Misc"
menu, then drag the selected files to "Drive B".

To copy the demo to a hard drive under OMEn is easiest. Open a second
directory window, and go into "Drive C". Drag the "Drive A" folder
into it from the first directory window. Rename the copy of "Drive A"
(which is now actually on Drive C) to "OMEN" to complete the
installation.

						Ordering

	We are pleased to have users run the demo, experiment with it,
create and print text and colour pictures, and play sounds.
	However, Esquimalt Digital Logic Inc does not authorize
productive use of the OMEn demos. If you find you are using OMEn
productively, you are expected and required to support the product by
ordering the licenced version: unauthorized use of software
constitutes software piracy. OMEn can only become a major system with
user supported funding to speed up further development and improve
system quality.
	And your productivity can be enhanced even more with the
configurability built into the licenced product. 
	The licenced version will be further upgraded in the coming
months as additional features are added, and upgrade disks will be
automatically shipped free to licenced users.

	Currently, OMEn is ordered directly from Esquimalt Digital
(phone 1-604-384-0499, fax 1-604-384-0575 VISA-Mastercard). More
details are shown under "Licencing OMEn" under the "Help" menu while
OMEn is running. An order form is included in the demo package which
may be printed out if your (dot matrix) printer is compatible with
the included printer driver.
 